and now we reach the next philosopher
in the progression heraclitus
h-e-r-a-c-l-i-t-u-s
he is not a my lesion he is a
pre-socratic who started his own school
and from the objectivist perspective he
is the first villain in the history of
western thought
he is also the first enduringly
influential philosopher in that his
particular views are still widespread
today
nobody today is a hydromonas
but there are all sorts of heraclitions
wandering around
heraclitus flourished about 500 bc
uh we have about 130 fragments
and uh they are so obscure that even in
the ancient world
he had the nickname the dark
because uh he was want to deliver
aphoristic cryptic uh utterances without
explanation sort of iraq oracular
now the essence of heraclitus's views
on which i want to pause for a few
minutes because of his importance
are an attack on what aristotle later
defined as the basic laws of logic now
obviously he could not have attacked the
laws of logic
explicitly because the laws of logic
were not even known until the 4th
century bc when aristotle defined
but in retrospect we can say that the
essence of what heraclitus was getting
at and what all of his
followers promptly made explicit is an
all-out attack on the law of identity
and the law of contradiction
now i assume you're familiar with those
laws from objectivist literature
so i'll just say them in a word and
explain their nature and importance
properly when we get to aristotle
but in a word the law of identity is the
simple view that everything which is
is what it is everything which exists
possesses a nature
possesses an identity it is something
and is nothing else
a is a and the law of contradiction
a corollary of the law of identity says
well then if things are what they are
a thing is not what it isn't as nothing
can be a
and non-a at the same time and in the
same respect
if you are six feet tall you're six feet
tall you can't
also be not six feet tall you might grow
but at a given time
you can only be six feet tall you might
cut off your legs but at a given time
and so on and so on
now aristotle claimed that these laws
were the basis of all
logical reasoning the basis of science
the basis of sanity
and uh you would certainly i think have
enough knowledge from objectivism to see
why aristotle would say that
heraclitus's point is these laws are out
as i say not explicitly he didn't say
that but that's the meaning
now why well he said
everybody is so interested in change
i propose to show that the phenomenon of
change
is incompatible with these laws of logic
i'll put it another way the phenomenon
of change
requires the existence of contradictions
requires things which are and are not at
the same time
well if so we'd like to know how
now i'll use the same example that i
used of the match and this time
derive heraclitus's conclusion from it
again obviously he did not use this
example
i'm going to put this match now through
a process of change
and ask you to observe it closely and at
a certain point we'll see if we can show
from heraclitus's point of view why it
ends up being contradictory
now i've just plucked this match this is
still the same match that i had a second
ago
it's still the same match right i mean i
didn't
take the original match and throw it
away and substitute a new match that
would be substitution but i didn't do
that i still have the same match
all right this is still the same match
i'm now going to
make it go through a process of change
still the same all right
here's the process of change now
all right now is this still the same
match
obviously it is still the same match i
didn't substitute another
but it obviously is not the same match
because it has changed
the tip is now hot and it used to be
cold and it's now black and it used to
be white and so on and so on
says heraclitus this match is therefore
the same
as it was at the beginning and yet
it has changed it is not the same as it
was at the beginning
at the same time namely after the change
it is what it was but it is not
what it was it is and is not
it's the same and not the same it's a
and not a
at the same time which is a
contradiction now could we give another
example
oh yes heraclitus is going to give all
sorts
for instance take any one of you now
remember the little baby that was born
20 40 whatever years ago
are you the same as that little baby
the same energy well obviously yes you
are
i mean we didn't take that little baby
and grind them up in a meat grinder and
bring in somebody new you are
it we didn't substitute you are the same
on the other hand what in the world is
the same about you now
as the hair requisites will say your
mental content is certainly completely
different your values ideas and so on
according to certain biologists every
cell in your body changes every seven
years and there's nothing physically
left the same
so you're completely different mentally
or physically and yet you're obviously
the same
you're the same and you're not the same
you're a
and you're not in now if you wanted to
apply
two thales the way heraclitus themselves
seem to argue is like this
everything is water thales says well
okay
then after a change the water is still
water
but since it's changed it isn't water
anymore so it is and it isn't
in other words we can generalize
wherever there is
change at the end of the change we have
the same thing
that's involved in it being changed
rather than substitution
but wherever there is change at the end
of the change we have a different thing
because that's inherent in it changing
therefore at the end of the change
we have the same and not the same thing
and therefore
change necessarily involves a
contradiction
but change is the most obvious fact
there is no one could possibly deny it
the only conclusion can be the world
is riddled with contradictions the world
is
filled with things which are and are not
in fact we can put it even better the
world is filled with things which
are and are not what they were and were
not
and what they will and will not
become as one commentator summarizes
heraclitus's view quote
reality's essential nature lies in being
both the same as itself
and different from itself for an order
to change
a thing must become different from
itself if it remains the same as itself
it hasn't changed
but also after it has changed it must
still be the same thing
otherwise there has been no change but
simply the substitution of one object
for another
a changing thing then is an identity of
opposites it both is and is not what it
was
and what it will be unquote now you may
think that that is a primitive
viewpoint that is obviously
got a flaw in it even if you might not
know right off hand what it is
but that there's something obviously
wrong with it and that's surely no one
after the development of modern science
and aristotelian logic and so on but
never have been taken in by that
so i'll take one minute out of our
packed schedule to read you
a quotation who said the following quote
the law of contradiction is afflicted
with falsity
it says nothing can both be and not be
but anything that can change defies it
it can both be and not be with the
utmost ease
unquote now that is not heraclitus
that is fcs schiller one of the leading
american pragmatists who taught for many
many years in the 20th century at the
university of southern california
or if you want another one who said this
quote
life consists before all just in this
that a living creature is at each moment
itself
and yet something else life is therefore
also a contradiction
present in processes continually
occurring
and solving itself and as soon as the
contradiction ceases
life also ceases and death steps in
pure heroclix applied to life that's
frederick ingalls
the sidekick of karl marx and what the
marxist made
is essentially a three-step waltz out of
heraclituses a viewpoint
but we won't cover that in this course
now as to what is wrong with this think
about it
i'm going to leave it for aristotle who
took care of it definitively
so if you don't figure out an answer to
it by then you'll be sure to get it
there let's go on to heraclitus's next
point
now he took change very seriously
on to his second point
everybody at this time as you know was
looking for the world stuff
the one in the many heraclitus looked
like everybody else
but he said i couldn't find anything
that was
everywhere couldn't be water because
there are things which aren't water and
the same reasons it couldn't be earth
and it couldn't be air and so on
there is he said only one thing that i
can find
everywhere without any exception and
that is
the process of change itself everything
is changing
slow or fast but at least everything is
changing
therefore he said if we really want to
know the key to reality if we want the
metaphysical phenomenon of course he
didn't use those words
the essence of reality is change
that is the metaphysical uh essence
now the word that he used is becoming
usually spelled with a capital b be
coming
everything is becoming changing evolving
development in process now since he made
this metaphysical
it follows that it applied to everything
not just to sticks and stones but
ceiling wax and kings and the whole
works
and therefore heraclitus took the view
that everything is changing
in every respect at every
instant change governs everything
and therefore nothing remains the same
for
two consecutive instance in any respect
now his famous sentence illustrating
this is
you can't step into the same river twice
for fresh waters are always flowing in
now that for him is the paradigm the
example of reality
you try to put your foot in it the next
time it's different
it's changed and everything is like that
now there are many obvious examples of
change to which you could
appeal landslides volcanoes earthquakes
biological growth the slow changes of
erosion and so on
but you might ask well what would a
follower of heraclitus do with such a
thing as this lecture
now this seems the most peaceful quiet
motionless unchanging thing you could
ask for
it just sits there what's happening
well heraclitus might personally have
had a little difficulty with it but his
followers don't bat an eye
when you give them an example of that
sort
because they say well looked at from
your crude human senses it looks like
it is motionless but if you could see it
as
modern science reveals it to us you
would see that this table
is a holocaust of activity there's all
sorts of subatomic particles
busily racing off and onto it
all the boundary interchanges and there
are electric
charges coursing through it and energy
pulsations and cosmic rays and you can
you know
get any cheap science fiction and put in
whatever you want there
the idea being that actually this table
is a world of activity
this lecture and it simply is the
crudeness of human senses that makes
this
activity undetectable to us but that
simply is the defect of our senses
we can therefore however confidently
generalize and say that
everything even the most apparently
stationary things are constantly
changing
now from this point heraclitus drew a
momentously important concept
he drew the consequence that there are
no things
at all no entities
now an entity means essentially a thing
for example a table a person
a mountain a cigarette a planet
now to the normal person it seems
blatantly obvious that there are all
kinds of things
all kinds of entities but a heraclitus
observed that if you accept his
principle
that everything is changing in every
respect at every instant
there are no entities now how does this
follow
well in essence he says
try and find me an entity
in reality remember which is constantly
changing you point to this lecture and
say there
it is but you know sooner got the it out
the t is still being pronounced and it's
gone completely the lectern it's
vanished in the flux
it's completely different from what it
was nothing stands still for one instant
therefore try to find
something and say there's a thing and
you just get to that
and the thing is gone
and therefore heraclitus summarized
in two famous aphorisms which are two of
his fragments
nothing is everything is becoming
which is surely a paradoxical utterance
and the other famous one is ponte rey in
other words
everything flows and nothing abides
now some of you have heard me read from
a commentator who actually makes this
point clear
and since the only time i've ever found
this particular point
made unequivocally clear i want to take
a moment to read you a fairly lengthy
passage from one historian
who outdid himself in the presentation
of this point
uh and since it's a very important point
hear him
on this point he's a modern commentator
summarizing heraclitus's view
i could not equal this level of clarity
on this point
quote all things flow
no man can ever step twice into the same
river how could he
the second time he tried to step new
waters would have flowed down from
upstream
the waters would not be the same neither
would the bed and the banks be the same
for the constant erosion would have
changed them too
and if the river is the water the bed
and the banks the river is not the same
river
strictly speaking there is no river
when people talk about a river they
suppose that a name
applies to something that will remain
there for a time at least
but the river remains there no time at
all
it has changed while you pronounce its
name
there is no river worse yet
you cannot step into the same river
twice
because you are not there twice
[Music]
you too change and the person who
stepped the first time
no longer exists to step the second time
persons do not exist
when anyone says that something exists
the meaning
is that that something does not change
at least
for a short time an object that is real
must be an object that stands still
a clever sculptor takes a lump of
children's modeling clay and begins to
work it rapidly
it shortly takes on the appearance of
the child's teddy bear
and if the sculptor should stop we could
call it a teddy bear
but he doesn't stop his nimble fingers
keep working
and the momentary bear turns into a
small statue of zeus
only quickly to disappear into the form
of the empire state building
well what is it you ask the answer is
not that it's a bear
or a god or a building under these
circumstances all we could say is that
it's modeling clay
and we could call it clay because the
clay remains the same
throughout the changes but if the clay
itself never remained the same
if it changed from clay to wax to paper
mache and so on and never stopped
changing
we could call it nothing nothing
that is it does not exist it is unreal
encore
nothing is everything is becoming
changes the world stuff
now this sort of philosophy is called a
process philosophy
because it holds that process activity
motion
change is reality now do not take this
superficially to mean merely that he
thinks a lot of things are happening in
the world
that a lot of things are happening in
the world is not a philosophic viewpoint
that
is a reader's digest homily
the heraclition view is that all that
exists
is change a stream of shifting restless
transitory seething boiling
bubbling melting fusing swirling
activity riddled with contradictions
because though the whole universe were
plunged in a kind of cosmic mix master
and just simply flowed in all directions
and of course didn't flow because you no
now heraclitus himself apparently
in an attempt to uh get a metaphor to
capture this
picked on fire because fire was the
closest he seemed to be able to get to
the idea of motion without any entity
you know the tongues leaping and darting
and yet there's nothing solid there
to get a hold of it seems to be like the
visual embodiment of pure
motion and therefore in that terminology
he said
the world stuff is fire but he did not
mean by fire any kind of material
substance
but a rather sheer process or acting
now i may point out that heraclitus had
a follower
many many but one in in the ancient
world
named kratos c-r-a-t-y-l-u-s
i didn't take down his dates but he was
a disciple of heraclitus and a teacher
of plato so he's between
two and he drew
a apparently perfectly obvious
conclusion from this principle
he stopped talking on principle
he took the view that no one should ever
speak
on the grounds that there is no way to
give words meaning
because the only way you can give words
meaning is by giving them a reference
and there's nothing for words to refer
to
if you try to say lectern by the time
you say lek
it's gone and therefore words are simply
noise and a respectable man does not
utter noise
according to aristotle from whom we
learn about this
cradle us at a certain point in his
conversion therefore stopped speaking
and simply wagged his finger when he was
hungry
presumably beckoning the non-heracles to
bring him food
now we will see aristotle's answer to
this point also
when we get there so much for
heraclitus's
fragments dealing with metaphysics
and now one last issue in connection
with heraclitus
of an epistemological sort he's the
first man in the history of philosophy
to regard the senses
as invalid
the reason is very simple by the
evidence of our senses
it appears that there are permanent
motionless
unchanging things and yet he says we
know that that's not true
we know that everything is changing
and so we simply must say that our
senses are deceptive
they're invalid they are simply too
gross to detect
the degree of change that is actually
taking place
sometimes his followers say
that the change which is taking place
is analogous to letting water into a
bathtub
via one pipe and out via another at the
same rate
so that an unwary spectator looking at
the surface will say no change is taking
place because in fact two opposite
changes are taking place
and cancelling each other out and
sometimes they use other equally
equivalent examples or caliber arguments
to account for the appearance of
permanence but in any event their
viewpoint is
we have shown by reason
that reality is filled with nothing but
change and therefore
we reject the senses
therefore an earth-shakingly important
distinction is implicit in heroclase
the distinction between two realms
reality and appearance
reality is that which really exists
in heraclitus's view it's a massive
change
by the way his view is his reality is
very often referred to as a heraclitum
flux
that being a way of describing nothing
but chain which is riddled with
contradictions besides
so there's reality and on the other hand
there is the world as it appears to us
the world that the greeks call the world
of appearance
reality is known by reason
reason apart from the senses reason in
contradiction to the senses and the
world of appearances
is the world as given us by the
deceptive senses
now this duality between reality and
appearance
and its corresponding epistemological
duality of reason versus the senses
runs all through greek philosophy with
one or two exceptions
and heraclitus is the first in which you
find
anyone who subscribes to this view and
who says that reason is what we should
follow
reason in this sense of the term reason
as opposed to the census
is called philosophically a rationalist
and therefore heraclitus can be regarded
as the first
greek rationalist that's obviously not
reason
in any objectivist or aristotelian sense
of the term but
that's the way the terms are used you
will see that plato of course is a
rationalist in this sense also
now in order to be fully fair to the
historical heraclitus
i would like to point out that he
himself believed
quite inconsistently with the rest of
his philosophy that change was actually
orderly
lawful intelligible he was in fact one
of the earliest formulators of the view
that the events in the world occur
according to law and can be understood
by the human mind
he thought there was a law of change
governing all the particular changes
now for his views on this question i
refer you to a history text
but he was in this respect and i say
this out of fairness a good rational
greek
in this respect the greeks almost
without exception
no matter how awful they became
always almost without exception had
something good to say
it's only since christianity took over
that you have philosophers that are
black from top to bottom but the greeks
almost always have something good and
that's true even of heracles
uh unfortunately the good element in him
was not nearly as influential as his
flux
side now i don't think i have to
point out to you the prevalence of
heracletianism today
anybody who says it's a changing world
and uses that in anything other than an
utterly innocuous sense
is a heracles anybody who says there
are no absolutes everything is relative
is it full-fledged orthodox aeroclash
because absolute in such a context means
invariant
unchanging in time or place something
which holds for all times and places
and of course for heraclitus there is no
such thing there are no
absolutes if it's true today it won't be
true tomorrow
and so on and of course the same kind of
relativism will be generated not only
for knowledge in general but for ethics
and value theory in particular
there'll be no absolutes in ethics any
more than in anything else
a viewpoint at which heraclitus himself
actually hinted
but simply hinted in one of his
fragments that ethical relativism
is the conclusion to draw if you ever
found anybody who equates old-fashioned
with false that is heraclitionism at
work
the idea being to take an example that i
hear
frequently the american constitution for
instance must be wrong
why well it was formulated in the 18th
century
so well now it's the 20th century
period now that argument
is pure heraclitus if the person
attempted to say
in the intervening years there have been
changes and so on well that should be
one thing
specific changes that require a specific
change he'd be wrong but at least that
would be a different argument
but if he simply says time has passed in
the 18th century can't be applicable on
the 20th
why can't it because everything flows
and nothing abides and that is
heraclitus
most skeptics base themselves partly on
heroclass
how can you say that you know that such
and such is really true
maybe yesterday it was true but how do
you know about tomorrow everything
changes
everything is becoming
dewey says at one point john dewey that
aristotle's logic must be no good
because it's worked for so long
you must need a new one now as to uh
what it would be like to live in the
herald clinician world
well of course physically you don't and
you can't
but you can get a good taste of it
unless you're very fortunate in your
social
existence because most people to some
extent live in a heraclitual world
socially a great many children live in
that kind of world
thanks to the want and irrationality of
their parents
whose behavior is characterized by
constant switching and swimming so that
nothing ever holds two from one moment
to the next
and by constant contradictions that is
the perfect recipe for the heraclitual
world
most citizens in relation to the
government of a mixed economy live in
exactly that
uh heraclitus in the world and if you
want a kind of perfect example
most businessmen in regard to the
antitrust laws
live in an absolutely clear-cut textbook
era collision world
because uh what are their complaints
about the anti-trust
laws one is everything flows and nothing
abides
interpretations change from moment to
moment you never know what's coming next
and the other is everything in that
world
is and isn't is competition good
yes of course because monopoly is bad is
competition good
no of course because the efficient will
then take away the markets of the
inefficient it is and it isn't
now that is heracliticism and you see
where it's getting us
if you want a marvelous portrayal of it
i recall to remind you
and suggest that you re-read the senior
atlas shrug between cheryl and dagny
where cheryl comes at the climactic part
in her relation with taggart and
saying that everything is switching
everything is swimming everything is
changing and she can't endure
or understand it and dagny says
tells her what she needs to know in
essence and tells her that
there have been philosophers working for
centuries
to bring about just that state well the
first and most influential of the
philosophers that she refers to
in this scene is heraclitus
why did heraclitus not say that the law
of change was the world
stuff rather than the change itself well
first of all he did not have a very
clear idea of what the law of change
consisted of it was
pretty much to the effect that there has
to be a balance and change in one
direction
in the so-called upward way has to
balance change in another direction of
the downward way
but i think the main point is that the
law of change is simply a description of
how
change operates and consequently is not
something apart from change although
i grant you that in according to some
commentators the law of change is
uh refined by heraclitus into an entity
distinct from change and many people
think that it
is one of the sources of the christian
god too so you can throw that in the pot
along with parmesan
one if you want